# OROV_Vector_vs_Virus_Modelling

Introduction: Oropouche virus (OROV) is an emerging arbovirus transmitted by Culicoides paraensis, a biting midge vector responsible for significant outbreaks in South America. Understanding the distribution of both the vector and the disease is critical for predicting potential risk areas and informing public health interventions. This study aims to separately model and compare the distribution of Culicoides paraensis and OROV circulation using environmental variables within an ecological niche model (ENM). The objective would be to develop suitability maps for both the vector and the virus under current and future climatic conditions in South America, and identify convergence zones which would allow for outbreaks. We also evaluate the impact of different pseudo-absence sampling techniques, to understand their effects on model accuracy and habitat predictions.

Methodology: This study employs Random Forests (RF, an Ecological niche model) to investigate the environmental variables influencing C. paraensis and OROV circulation, focusing on their overlaps. We analyse current climate, anthropogenic and land-cover data, as well as future projections to identify key drivers and project distributions into the years 2060, 2080 and 2100 under different climate and socio-economic scenarios for the entire Americas. Additionally, we assess the impact of various pseudo-absence selection techniques, including random and informed sampling, and their effects on model accuracy and habitat predictions. 

Findings: We found that an informed sampling technique performed better than random sampling for pseudo-absences. Results also indicate overlaps in the environmental variables that favour both the vector and the virus circulation, such as human population density, urban built environments, banana cultivation, evergreen broadleaf forests, and tree cover rich areas. Furthermore, the informed sampling strategy demonstrated superior performance compared to random sampling in enhancing model accuracy. Comparing the distribution maps of the vector to the virus reveals a less extensive suitability range for the vector, indicating this as a potential limiting factor for OROV outbreaks in the Americas. However, adaptation to secondary vectors, such as Ae. aegypti and Culex quinquefasciatus, which demonstrated more extensive ranges in the Americas, could facilitate the spread of OROV.

Conclusion: Climate change and demographic shifts are significantly altering the risk landscape for Oropouche virus (OROV) in the Americas. Rising temperatures and changing precipitation patterns associated with climate change can expand the geographical range and expand the distribution of Culicoides paraensis. This expansion may introduce the virus to previously unaffected regions, potentially exposing naive populations to OROV.
